# Introductory Remarks

By Peter Hendrickson

(For fifteen years Professor of Modern Languages in Beloit College.)

---

It is the earnest solicitation of the author to which I have yielded in consenting to write a few introductory remarks to this volume. The consideration that a name more known to fame would serve his purpose better has little weight with the author. His faith in his cause is as boundless as his love for it; and he is content to rest his cause on it's own merits.

It is Gladstone, we believe, who has estimated that in a not very remote future the English language will be spoken by one thousand millions of the human race.

Such a prediction, coming from such a source, may well stir the heart and arouse the pride of everyone who calls the English his mother tongue. Indeed, the unification of the whole human race is a thought prominent in our time. But speculations on this theme, no matter how agreeable they may be, would carry us beyond our purpose, and we must confine ourselves to matters which more nearly concern the present.

A glance at the rapid extension of the area over which the English language has become dominant, leaves no doubt of the greatness of its opportunities. The English may already be called a world-language, as the English-speaking race is a world-winning race. But in the future, its extension will not depend, so much as heretofore, upon conquests or discoveries, nor wholly upon the changing currents of commerce. It must show its inherent fitness to rule, not by its political institutions, or the tonnage of its vessels, but by its power over the minds of men. It must gain its supremacy by the willing consent of the world.

But in order to do this, it must, as it seems to us, make a preliminary conquest which shall restore it to supremacy over itself. What is meant by this, space will not permit us fully to elucidate here. But we may say, briefly, that no one gets willing obedience where he imposes unnecessary burdens. To gain cheerful acceptance, a language should not require to be conquered separately and in succession by all the senses. When it has become familiar to the ear it should not be a stranger to the eye. It should have no masks and no mysteries. It should be friendly to the understanding, and deal kindly with the memory. It should inspire confidence and gain strength by its simplicity and directness. Can any one be blamed for being suspicious of a language whose noblest word, *knowledge* (nolej), wears a dress twice too large for it?

Truthfulness and practical common sense are marks of the highest enlightenment. But these will condemn a vicious taste which clothes an otherwise common thing with reverence simply because it is unfamiliar. *Almight* is as vulgar to the perverted taste as *omnipotence* is to the simple Anglo-Saxon mind. The prime requisite, to gain the respect of others, is to have respect for one's self. We do not respect him who borrows of others when he has abundance of his own. *Ken* used to be a strong and familiar word to our ancestors. How would *star-ken* have served for astronomy? or *man-ken* for anthropology? Our author proposes *lore*, and would substitute *plant-lore* for botany. How would a child fare with "*nolej of plantlore*" for *knowledge of Botany*? Would it lessen his respect for his mother tongue?

A writer in "Scribner's Magazine," about fifteen years ago, in speaking of the difficulty the Japanese found in adapting their old forms of speech to the flood of new ideas which suddenly had come upon them, says that "they were talking of adopting ours, but did not like our irregular verbs and arbitrary pronunciation." Shall we class that among the lost opportunities? The writer adds: "It is a pity that we cannot meet them half way, and give our language a little of that simple euphony which would make its acquisition easier for them as well as our own infant learners. The punitory miracle at Babel has set up barriers all about us. How shall we beat down the wall for our allies in Japan?" Yes; how shall we? This is a question that must be answered, and the sooner the better. It has been delayed long enough.

We are constantly improving everything that we use, except what we use most—our language. Every tool in every trade is made better and more convenient, year by year. But language is a tool we cannot lay aside long enough to have repaired. This is the prime difficulty in the way of language reform. There have been made isolateed attempts for centuries to improve the old, or to invent a new language, and fit it for universal adoption. All have met the same fate, and for the same reason. The changes proposed have been too radical. But in spite of all failures, similar efforts are multiplying, and it seems as if the civilized world were on the eve of some great movement in this direction. It is, as they say, "in the air."

Among the attempts most recently made in this direction, is Volapuk, which has gained the ear of the world in larger measure than any other, but its race is probably soon run. To attempt to make a special language for a special purpose, like commerce, travel or diplomacy, must, in the nature of the case, be a failure. In travel, in diplomacy, and even in trade, men want to express their thoughts with ease, with grace, with force and freedom. This they will never be able to do with a mechanically constructed language, which is no one's mother tongue, which has no history to make it respected, and no literature to make it loved. A language without a past will be a language without a future. To create a new language for a special convenience is an extravagant folly; and to get away from the language on which a people's mind has fed and grown, and by which its thoughts and feelings have been expressed through generations, is as impossible as to run away from one's shadow. But this does not imply that errors and defects have become sacred because they are in the realm of speech.

Our language is like a tangled forest into which seeds have been wafted by every wind, and which have grown in disordered and bewildering luxuriance. The child is lost in its mazes and labyrinths, and the man is bewildered with its abundance. Instead of this is should be like a royal garden, where nature and art had mutually aided each other; where the grafting knife and pruning hook had been guided by a cunning hand, and where every path leads to some familiar spot, from whence a child could always find its way home.

In a recent editorial discussing the merits of Volapuk, the Chicago Tribune, which has always been friendly to language reform, says:

> But the fact that learned men have devoted time to the invention and propagation of a proposed universal language, shows how deep is the realization of its necessity by thinking people, whatever their vernacular; and the main principle kept in mind in the construction of Volapuk, and used with unquestionable advantage by its advocates — its fonetic character — indicates precisely the direction in which some living language must be modified in the process of becoming universal. There is nothing in the history of civilization to encourage the belief that any language, however attractive, can be artificially extended. Conquest, not followed by commerce, cannot do it.

In closing the same article, the writer says:

> By fonetic changes, consistent with the genius of the language, sound and spelling can be unified; and in time, as it becomes more and more the universal language, it will fall into an artistic mold in which simplicity will preserve its essence without diminishing its power or impairing its beauty.

This expresses, with striking accuracy, the aim of the author of the present work, though it implies a leaving to chance one essential feature of the reform for which the author has sketched the outline of a definite plan. There is not in the history of our language adequate ground for the belief that it "will fall into an artistic mold" if only its "sound and spelling have become unified," any more than that the forest will of itself become a park. In addition to a simplified, fonetic spelling, the thought and taste of the time need to be directed towards the purification of its vocabulary. There is need of a clearer conviction of the fact that the true economy, as well as the source of power, lies in development from within, rather than accretions from without.

The leading purpose of the author is mental economy. This is to be reached through three main channels. (1) By simple and correct spelling; (2) by a gradual purification of our vocabulary, aiming to enrich our store of words from our own Anglo-Saxon and allied sources, making the words self-developing and self-explaining; and (3) by the largest practical regularity of grammar.

In these changes, however, one thing should not be lost sight of, namely, that no change can be considered practicable, and no reform commendable, which secures any advantage, no matter how desirable, at the expense of symmetry, euphony and force; and this, I think, the author has no where lost sight of, though he has probably in some directions gone farther than most readers will consent to follow.

This is natural. Every reformer must, in the nature of the case, be more or less an *iconoclast* (this word I have smuggled in, for it has met the author's especial disapproval.) A reformer who does not for a time go ahead of the masses, would have too little force to arouse either sympathy or opposition, and should more properly be classed among politicians than reformers.

The present effort is remarkable, I think, in one essential particular. It is not the dream of an isolated idealist or recluse. It is a growth in the author's mind out of his own needs, and is a voice directly *from* the people—from that comvination of our population which is characteristic of our great interior. This will be more plain to the reader by a few references to the life of the author.

**Elias Molee** was born in Racine County, Wisconsin, in 1854, and is the son of one of the earliest immigrants to that State from Norway. He grew up among American, German, Irish, and Scandinavian neighbors. While the language in the district school which he attended was English, he would daily hear three or four languages spoken on the play-ground. As with so many thousand other children in our land similarly situated, there arose a struggle in his mind and heart between the two rivals, the language of the hearth, his mother's tongue, and the language of the school. The influence of such circumstances upon the mental habit and the character of a child can be understood only by him who has intelligently experienced it. Upon a dull mind, I think this constant strain has an enfeebling effect. It disturbs and disquiets the whole nature. Neither mind nor heart are fully absorbed or at rest any where. Upon the alert and critical mind, it has quite another influence. It arouses curiousity, stimulates observation, exercises the judgment and expands the mind. It acted thus upon the young mind of the author. He became ambitious to learn all these languages. He acquired the English in the school, the Norwegian-Danish at home, but the German was not so easily laid hold of. He therefore, while yet a small lad, gained permission of his father to go to a German who kept a country store on the borders of a German and American settlement, to seek employment. His earnestness, the already acquired master over two languages, and his desire for the language of "das Vaterland" in addition, was just the recommendation that gained favor in the sight of the German storekeeper. From that time to this, one thought has been uppermost in his mind. The spelling of the English language impressed him as a cruelty to the native-born child and more than that to the foreign-born. Wherever he found in any of the other languages some feature in which he thought it excelled the English, he longed to see it appropriated by his adopted language, the English. We are here building up an American nationality out of elements contributed by various nations. It will be a grand nation. Why cannot our language also draw to itself the best features of allied tongues and conquer the world?

Shall the American nation, with its grand opportunities with a future before it like that of no other people, continue its career without an effort to brush off the defects which cling to its speech? Shall this practical, common sense people, that in other things so well understand the value of time, let every generation of its multiplying millions through all ages, waste at least three years of its best time in the often vain effort to learn to spell? Shall the ever-questioning, quickly absorbing mind of the child forever struggle with sounds and words which suggest no thought and bear the likeness of no know image on earth or in heaven, whil the rich treasures of thought and feeling are waiting on all hands to inspire and fructify it? Shall the wealth of exact science, which is the boast and glory of our age, be denied to the multitudes who have neither the time nor the means to spend years in learning dead languages, from whose exhumed relics the jargon is constructed which is called the nomenclature of science? These and similar questions it is which since childhood, have given the author no rest, until after thirty years of quiet picking, gathering and arranging, he has finally rehabilitated an "American" or Teutonic-English language, which is harmonious in its parts, beautiful in its simplicity, pliable in every limb, well sounding to the ear and capable of a growth and self-developement adequate to any measure of intellectual expansion. Such, at least is the hope and faith of its author.

His thirst for a more thorough knowledge of languages early led him to the Norwegian College at Decorah, Iowa, where, besides modern languages, he acquired some knowledge of the classics. From there he went to the American Academy at Albion where he graduated. Later he prosecuted his linguistic studies at the University of Wisconsin, constantly in consultation whith scholars in regard to the one theme about which all his thoughts centered. The gaining of a livelihood has always been a secondary consideration with him, so that, in order that this obtrusive necessity should divert his attention as little as possible, he has in recent years settled down on a farm in Dakota, and thus, hampered with less care, been enabled to complete the preliminary sketch of his work.

Like that of all men who are gifted with the power of concentrating their energies for a life-work upon one theme, so the author's mind has been focused upon this thought till it burns with a steady flame, and is inspired with a faith that will listen to no suggestion of defeat. His enthusiasm is not demonstrative, but it is nevertheless contagious. And though my conviction may in part be due to this contagion, I cannot deny that the system here proposed seems to me, in its essential features, the only conceivable method by which the English language can be restored to a supremacy over itself, and be made entirely worthy of the commanding position which we trust its future destiny may have in store for it.

There is one thought which I would urgently commend to the mind of the unprejudiced reader. This is no scheme gotten up to create a sensation or to gain selfish ends. Whatever judgment the world may pass upon it as a system, let it be assured that this is a work of conscientiuos devotion to a noble purpose. It is a cause to which the author has unreservedly devoted his whole life. He is a native-born, patriotic and loyal citizen of this country, and seeks only its glory and its gain. This work must not be classed with the injudicious attempts to crowd a foreign language into our schools, or as in any way calculatted to detract from our language by emphasizing the superiority of any other. The plan proposed is largely one of mutual concession, but in all essentials the English stands unshaken on its foundation, yielding to no other except where it seems to result in manifest advantage. The plan should arouse no national jealousies; its aim and spirit is to draw all together into a more natural and conscious union.

Ours is a composite nationality, yet largely in a nascent state. The process of welding together the different elements is the real national life now in progress within the borders of these free States. On the surface is the scum of politics and the noice of bread-winning, but below, in the calm, unseen deep, goes on the slow process of absorbing and assimilating into unison the diverse elements of population which gather within our borders. Any apparent harmony, any temporary prosperity, will be evanescent and delusive unless there is constant progress towards a more perfect union of the various elements now contributing materials towards the forming of the ultimate homogeneous *American People*. The controling and molding Power exerted by the genius and the free institutions of our early settlers is beyond doubt the mightiest influence ever felt in the history of mankind. This power will also in the future be adequate to shape the destinies of our country. But it may not be unreasonable to assume that a gradual simplification of our language in the lines here proposed will facilitate the outer unification and strengthen the consciousness of inner relationship between the representatives of the Teutonic race, of which our population in the main consists.

There are a number of subordinate features connected with the proposed plan of reform to which I am not prepared to assent. The same will, no doubt, be the case with a majority of the readers. Our vocabulary is so largely recruited from the Latin that an attempt at a total expurgation of words of this origin would seem not only futile but enfeebling. A language, as well as any other institution, must bear the traces of its history. This is neither a shame nor a disadvantage. But a too ready sacrifice of its own for that which is alien is a fatal weakness. A return to a healthy measure of self-reliance and self-development, without aiming pedantically to erase all traces of its histoory, will give new clearness and force to our English language. The effort should not be to blot out its history, but to relieve the language of its inherent weaknesses and assumed burdens. No word should be condemned, no matter what its origin, unless a substitute can be found equally as good of purer lineage. But the very principal of historical necessity will of itself in time produce modifications in the direction here suggested. This reform itself springs forth as a new shoot from our historical soil. In some way or other the language of the future American will reveal the elements from which the nationality is compounded. The question here presented is: shall the change be a conscious effort directed by intelligent purpose, or shall it be left to mere chance?

The author does not insist on the minor details of his scheme. He is more conservative than reformers as a class. His system of numerals will probably not meet favor; his alphabet will need improvement; the introduction of new sounds is objectionable. Everything may be regarded as suggestions submitted for intelligent discussion, rejection or approval, except the three main features—a more regular grammar, a freer return to native sources for additions to our vocabulary, and a simple spelling. It is an invitation to the intelligent men and women of our land to join in a conscious effort to make the American language more homogeneous, more pliable, less exacting on the powers of the learner, and more truly an exponent of our history as a composite nationality. Such changes would facilitate its progress and justify its claims to larger dominion.

Its introduction, if favorably received, should not be a revolutionary one. The changes proposed should be set before the minds of the people and the rising generation as an ideal towards which efforts more or less emphatic should be directed, beginning with the reform of spelling, and correcting the taste as regards the use of Anglo-Saxon words. The bondage to a dictionary should be ended, and a larger liberty in the forming out of our own material any word whose meaning would be evident from its parts. The change would be so gradual as to involve no serious inconvenience.

These remarks must, in a measure be apologetic. The author is conscious of defects in the method of presenting his thoughts. His English is at times inaccurate and unclear. For this he craves the reader's indulgence. It is in part due to circumstances which at present could not be controlled. He is a scholar in the field in which he labors; but as he has spent so much time in medittating on what the English language ought to be and might have been, he may be pardoned for not always remembering what it is. But this will not detract materially from the value of his work in the minds of those who are in earnest about an important cause.
