# Chapter p.

## Many Speakers No Sign of Goodness of Language

The fact that a language is spoken over a great extent of territory or spoken by a great number is no indication of superiority or inferiority as a medium of communication. The Chinese is an inferior language and yet is spoken by the greatest number on account of numerous births and ancient conquests and annexations. From the little country of Spain with only a few millions inhabitants her language spread over Mexico, the West Indian Islands, Phillipine Islands, and all South America, except Brazil. The cause was war and discovery. The little insignificant country of Portugal has succeeded in planting her language in many extensive tracts of territory in Africa and all over the Empire of Brazil, an empire which equals that of the United States in area, excepting Alaska. Again the cause has been war and discovery. The same may be said with regard to the Russian language.

The English owe the possession of the Dominion of Canada to the discovery of foreigners, namely John and Sebastian Cabott, two Florentines, who had resided for some time in England, and who sailed out under the English flag in a north-westerly direction A.D. 1497, discovered Labrador and other parts further south. They brought back as specimens of the products of the country 2 Indians and 3 turkeys. Cheap acquisition! Canada proper was wrung from France by important help from the American colonists. Holland discovered New York in 1609. They commenced settlement in 1613 at New York and later in New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Delaware. By war and treaty England has taken from the little enterprising Dutch sailor people the following countries: New York (then called New Amsterdam), Australia (then called New Holland), Tasmania (then called Van Diemens Land), and the Cape Colony in Africa. The Dutch, through their diligence and daring, went ahead and discovered, but the the English took it away from them. The English have been hard on the Dutch and on the Irish. That is one cause of the spread of the English language. This tongue got a start in the United States, and those who came here afterwards learned the language as a matter of necessity. In this way the language has obtained a strong foot-hold although only a minor portion of the inhabitants of the United States can trace their ancestors back to English origin.

The spread of the French language is owning not to war nor colonization, but in small degree. Fashion and imitation are potent factors that have been at work here. Louis XIV of France had the most elegant court of Europe. This he could have, being at the head of the richest and most powerful nation at the time. Other courts, dazzled by this splendor, imitatted the French manners and language. Imitation was more powerful and more unreasonable then than now. It was further found necessary to adopt the French as a language of diplomacy and international communication, because it was felt that Frenchmen were unable and unwilling to learn any other languages. This linguistic inability of the French is proverbial in Europe. Even the French Minister at Berlin during 1870-71, at so important a time as the Franco-German war, could not speak German, and was hence less prepared for his calling that a foreign commercial traveler. The French is not a good people's language. Hervert Spencer criticizes it very severly in his "Study of Sociology." It employs a double nominattive and a double negative, as, "votre frere ou est-il?" and "il n'est pas; a clumsy comparison of adjectives, as, le plus beau for *finest*. It is very badly spelt, very irregular and, as Prof. G.P. Marsh says, very full of idiotic expressions where words mean something entirely different from what they appear to mean. It has no neuter gender and is very mixed and arbitrary. The language is pronounced with an ill-sounding nasal twang. Rev. Schleyer, author of Volapuk, says French sounds very badly in singing. Yet in spire of all these defects, French became fashionable through the elegance and wealth of the royal courts of France. The common people has never stood very high for intelligence, and never will, because it takes to much time and money for poor children to master the arbitrary spelling and mixed and non-self-explaining words of the French language. The French tongue, as we shall show further on, is only a little better as a means of popular education than the present English.
