# Chapter b.

## A Lifting Language

That a language may lift a people up into knowledge and self-respect on a large scale, it must be self-explaining, pure and homogeneous like the ancient Greek, Irish, modern German and Skandinavian. That is, a good language must be readily understood on a wide variety of subjects with the least resort to dictionaries. It must above all things be expressive and transparent. There is only one way of making the language shuch, and that is to proceed from the *known* to the *unknown*; to build from within. Discard borrowing and take to self-development, so that the common words, which all understand, may help to explain and remember the less frequent words. For instance, the Greeks took the following common words to build higher self-explaining ones, as *ichthus* was the regular common name for fish. Every Greek child knew what *ichthus* (fish) meant, also that *logos* meant *learning* or *lore*; now, when the wonderfully wise Greeks wanted to give a name to a certain kind of *learning* or *logos*, which had for its subject matter *fishes* or *ichthuses*, they said with a beautiful simplicity *ichthyologia*, A.S. *fisc-lar* (fishlore), German *fischlehre*, Skandinavian *fiskelare*, American fish-lore. How expressive and picturesque! How poetical *ichthyologia* must have been to the ancient Greek man and woman who spoke every day of *fish* as *ichthus* and of *lore* or *learning* as *logos* or *logia*. *Ichthyologia* was just as expressive to them as *shoemaker*, *schoolhouse* and *breastbone* (sternum) are to our children. What would *Plato* or *Socrates* have said if some Greek clown had borrowed the English *fishlore* or the German *fischlehre*? They would certainly have said *fishlore* or *fischlehre* is not in harmony with our common Greek words. We must build from our own known words, so that our Greek children and laboring men and students of other branches of knowledge can readily understand and remember what they hear spoken on the strangest subjects. We must therefore, fellow-citizens of Greece, develop from our own material and say *ichthyologia*. How expressive this word is! How full of open spreading vowels to make the word euphonious. The Greeks would never have mounted up high with the English language, for the spirit moves early in a harmonious, thought-aiding and hoomogeneous speech. The Greeks had *Demosthenes*, the greatest among orators, *Homer*, the greatest poet. Pope says Homer had the finest ear and he always preferred in his verses open spreadinhg vowels of which the Greek language is so full. Aristotle was one of the greatest philosophers. Even such a scholar as the learned Irishman, Bishop Whateley, is pleased, even to his day, when he can show in his rhetoric and logic agreement with Aristotle. The Greeks were as brave as they were wise. Think of their struggles at *Marathon*, *Thermopylae* and Platae! Herodotus was the greatest historian, Euclid the greatest mathematician and Socrates the purest moralist. What enhances our admiration for the Greeks is the fact that they had no other people to copy after or borrow from. They started theatres and wrote comedies and tragedies. Who is not filled with admiration and gratitude at hearing such names as Miltiades, Themistocles, Perikles, Demosthenes, Socrates, Epaminondas, Alexander, Plato, Plutarch, Strabo, Thucydides, Aristophanes, AEschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, Herodotus, and Homer? The Roman literature is little more than a copying after the Greeks. The Greeks had a harmonious, self-developed, euphonious, self-explaining language, like the German and Irish. The Germans excel in learning in our time, as the Greeks did of old. No people using a mixed, arbitrary language has got to the front, and never will, because understanding and remembering is made too difficult on a large scale. The ancient sons of the "Emerald Isle" stood very high for learning in olden times, before they forgot so much of their own euphonious and self-developed Irish tongue. People came from all parts of Europe to acquire wisdom and eloquence from Irish scholars. After the Irish tongue had been oppressed by the English law and language, they have gradually sunk in intelligence. This is not to be wondered at. England also stands low with regard to literacy. The Atlantic States in our country have gradually retrograded during the last fifty years and are continuing to go downwards. Even those who do go to school part of the year enough to learn to read easy pieces, understand far less of what they read than those people that are blessed with self-developed and self-explaining home words, as the Germans, Skandinavians and the former Irish. I shall show further on that under equal advantages or adversities the English speaking people will inevtiably fall bvehind as a people in popular education. England and the United States have hitherto enjoyed special advantages. Englad by her extended commerce and foreign colonies has subsisted to a great extent on the sweets of other lands. She has drawn largely on the future by her immense "national debt," which every one calls an evil to the people at large. The United States have possessed a land that is probably the best country of its extent in the world. Long navigable rivers, abundant timber, plenty of coal, iron, gold, silver and green pastures, and over and above all, a *virgin soil*, few wars and comparatively small population, and yet the English speaking people stands the *lowest* among the Germanic nations in literacy. Not because they are less talented, less strong and enduring, but because the English is an unfortunate language. 97 per cent. of the people in Germany, Scandinavia, Holland and Iceland, over ten years old, can read and write, and that is the highest point reached in literacy by any people on the globe. There are always a few cripples or weak persons who cannot be taught. In the northern States where there is found the greatest proportion of foreigners, there is most wealth and intelligence. In the South, where the Old Natives are less mixed by immigration, the white population stands far below the whites of the North. It must also be remembered that the greatest amount of ignorance has come to the United States from English speaking countries, not from Germany, Skandinavia and Holland. English wastes the time of children in mastering the cruel spelling which the majority of laboring people forget in after-life. It wastes the time in memorizing the definitions in school-readers and in searching for the meaning of words through expensive dictionaries. They soon forget the meaning of those arbitrary borrowed words, because they are not ingrafted into the mind in childhood by means of the ever recurring common words. 53 per cent. of English words are taken from all the languages of the world and thrown together in one chaotic mass. The only parallel to this much borrowing are the Turks who have taken half of their words from the Arabian and Persian. They having taken so much from one source makes it more homogeneous and self-explaining than English. There is no honor in borrowing. It is the easiest method possible by which to enrich language.

Mere borrowing requires neither love, learning nor ingenuity. It is only necessary to take without pay what others have made ready. But to so develop our own material, whatever that may be, that our language will vividly express all ideas of ancient or modern times possessed by ourselves and others, with clearness and euphony, that is something which requires love, learning, patience and talent. Then we will have a language that we can call our own, a language we can understand on all subjects, something we can love because it is our own and good to us, something that is kind to our understanding and memory. The impure English cannot be loved as the pure German, Scandinavian and Irish, because English is so unkind, so arbitrary and so much mixed that it belongs in particular to no people. This mixture of languages was forced into England by William the Conqueror after the defeat of the English at the battle of Hasting A.D. 1066. The English speak, therefore, as a conquered people. They speak as they do because they were conquered by the Norman French in 1066. The foreign conquerors learned the most common words of the people, as, father, mother, son, daughter, house, ox, cow, land, stone, etc.; but when they wanted to express higher intellectual ideas, they dragged in their own Norman French words. This accustomed the people to arbitrary-word mixing and soon wore off the feeling of incongruity.

The value of a *lifting language*, a language that could elevate the masses by self-explaining and thought-quickening words, was probably never thought of or cared for in those days of selfishness, violence and ignorance. I have given you a slight indication of how the ancient Greeks and the modern Germans and Scandinavians develop from within out of their own well-known material, so that even rare words explain themselves. Now let me show you a few Irish words.
