# More Thoughts Remembered with Self-Development

We know, from the study of mental philosophy, that memory depends upon certain laws. The most prominent of these laws that concern us now are understanding, repetition, vividness, likeness and unlikeness. That is, we remember longer what we understand than what is imperfectly understood. *Oculist* and *ichthyology* are not understood the first time they are seen. Hence easy to forget, while *eyehealer* and *fishlore* would be easy to remember, especially after being used to this mode of compounding.

Repetition and time are necessary to ingraft words into the mind. When we say *eyehealer* instead of *oculist*, we take advantage of words which repetition and time have already ingrafted, and are not obliged to ingraft a new extra term, hence less burden on memory. This mode of composition is alike in all cases a mere juxtaposition of images. Two things joined are easier to remember than one isolated fact. Again, *eyehealer* is more picturesque, hence it is more vivid. *Eyehealer* brings nature fully before the mind's eye, and this facilitates memory. Likeness and unlikeness are not only great memory-strengtheners, but the foundation of all reasoning. When objects are named from something they are like or unlike, as they often must be in a self-developing language, this will also facilitate memory. Examples: *sword-shaped* instead of *ensiform*; *unnatural*, not like *nature*. If the same negative particle is always used, it facilitates both understanding and memory; hence, *uncorrect* instead of *incorrect*.

Civilization is getting so complex, there are so many things to be remembered, that it will really become necessary to economize the number of independent isolated words by compounding into self-explaining ones those we know, and that will of course help memory.
