# More Thoughts Definite with Self-Development

*Phenogamia* is a Greek word referring to those plants that bear *fruit* or that bear *seed*, we cannot tell which. The Germans or Skandinavians would say fruitbearing or seedbearing, according to the particular idea wanted. If they desired to express any other thought, they could easily manufacture a new word in a minute, whether in the dictionary or not. Each word would be easy to understand and remember and be *definite*. The foreign borrowed word being difficult to master, there is a reluctance to borrow any more expressions than is absolutely necessary, hence we must often content ourselves with the same expression for several distinct ideas. Take, for instance, *anatomy* and *ascend*. Anatomy is called by the Germans either *Zergliederungskunt* (that is dismembering art or unlimbing art,) or it is called *Zergliederungswissenschaft* (that is dismembering science), according as they wish to emphasize it as an art or science. The word is long, but this is necessary to make it so descriptive that students of other branches of knowledge, as well as the people at large, can understand as much as possible of what is read, and it is long that it may be *definite*. We say *ascend* in English, which is a very general and indefinite word, but as we have the word, there is a temptation to use it. The German who loves to be definite and exact, will use a word expressing the mode of ascending, as *aufgehen, aufsegeln, auffahern, aufreiten, auflaufen*, etc., that is *upgo, upsail, upfare, upride, uprun*. Not any of these definite, self-explaining home-compounds take any more syllables than *ascend*. When a langauge is correctly constructed, it is just as easy to speak definitely as generically, and in the long run, it gives a man more solid knowledge.

Self-development makes words better understood, longer remembered and more definite.
