# A Pure Language Enjoys More Love

English is not blood of our blood nor flesh of our flesh. Fifty-three per cent of the words are borrowed. It is just as impossible for an Englishman to love his language as much as a German loves his, as it is for a white man to love a negro child as much as his own. It would be an unnatural and insane love. The greater part of the words in the English are unkind and expensive intruders, forced on the English against their will by William the Conqueror, who was a grandson of Gang Rolf, a Norwegian pirate that had settled in the Providence of Normany with his countrymen. They married French wives, as they were nearly all single men. Hence, the Norman-French were a mixture of Norwegian and French. What is our own Anglo-Saxon inheritance we *keep*, and only systematize a little here and there. I want to ask the Englishman (is it a very heart-stirring request to ask?) in the interest of millions of school children, that he give up, not what is his own, but simply give up French, Latin, Greek, Turkish, Arabic and Chinese words, and that he honor his *own* Anglo-Saxon and Germanic material, so that his people can understand and love his language. In the United States there is, of course, less reason to love this mixed language than in England. Can't the English purify language as well as Germans, Skandinavians and Russians? Do the English people need an easily understood language for their schools and their people any less than other nations?

The education of a vast mass is a serious expense, even with the easiest understood and remembered tongues, but with English a highest popular intelligence is out of the question. A few University men will get a little taste of science, and the common people will be excluded from science.
